Reviewer #2: Referee report on MS COST-D-09-00147

Overall:

This paper from DSC-2009 documents the maxLik package, which is mainly
a wrapper around a number of fairly standard optimization routines. It
is not highly original in its methodology, but it appears solid and is
the basis of several other packages, so it deserves publication
although some minor revision is called for.

Major comments:

In Section 2, the authors have completely overlooked the mle()
function in the "stats4" package and also the efforts of Ben Bolker in
his "bbmle" package. These should at least be mentioned.

In Section 3.2.1, "the expectation of the outer product of the
gradient" is introduced without comment. From a purist point of view,
the likelihood function does not contain enough information about the
probability space for that to be a computable quantity. E.g. two
different probability models can give the same likelihood function. As
far as I can see, two points are being omitted here: (a) the
likelihood is a product of independent terms and (b) the expectation
is being replaced by an average. I think this needs to be said more
clearly.

In Section 3.3.2, the algorithm automatically constrains some
parameters, and gives standard errors corresponding to the constrained
models. The point made in Section 2 (p.3.8-10) applies here as well,
and should be stated. It is not clear to me whether this code actually
uses constrOptim or not.

Minor points:

We have "R" in sans-serif, in double quotes, and in italics. Please
make up your mind!

1.20: delete "with interface"
1.37: "frameworks"
1.39: "easy reporting of"
2.28: "the basis for"
3.17: stdEr looks wrong, stdErr or SE would be better. Is there no
     vcov() method?
5.46-6.4: This could be a c(sum(...), -N/sigma...) construct. I can
     understand that you don't want to do that for the Hessian on
     p.7, though.
10.28: reduce to "We give an example using the gradientless..." (or
     maybe "gradient-free")
11.34 (& more): "Fixing" something is ambiguous in English, so replace
     with "hold fixed" whereever possible.
12.20: "be free" -> "vary freely"
